>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 24:
HURRICANE PATRICIA MAKES
LANDFALL IN MEXICO, THEN WEAKENS
RAPIDLY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, HOPING
FOR SAFE HARBOR IN THE U.S.
AFTER FLEEING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
IN HONDURAS.
>> (translated): EVERY 13
HOURS, A WOMAN IS MURDERED IN
THIS COUNTRY.
>> Brangham: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM, HARI
SREENIVASAN IS ON ASSIGNMENT.
HURRICANE PATRICIA HAS TOPPLED
TREES AND BATTERED BUILDINGS,
BUT HAS CAUSED MUCH LESS DAMAGE
THAN EXPECTED.
THE STORM, WHICH BRIEFLY RATED
AS THE STRONGEST HURRICANE ON
RECORD IN THE WESTERN
HEMISPHERE, WITH 200mph WINDS
WHILE OVER THE PACIFIC OCEAN,
HAS BEEN DOWNGRADED TO A
TROPICAL DEPRESSION WITH WINDS
OF ONLY 35 MILES AN HOUR.
PATRICIA WEAKENED AS IT MADE
LANDFALL ON MEXICO'S PACIFIC
COAST LAST NIGHT AND LARGELY
SPARED THE CITIES IN ITS PATH,
INCLUDING GUADALAJARA AND THE
SEASIDE RESORT OF PUERTO
VALLARTA.
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS AND
TOURISTS HAD FLED INLAND.
HEAVY RAINS HAVE CAUSED FLOODING
BUT THERE ARE NO REPORTS OF
FATALITIES.
THE REMNANTS OF PATRICIA ARE
EXPECTED TO ADD TO THE HEAVY
RAINS ALREADY FALLING ON TEXAS.
MORE THAN A FOOT OF RAIN FELL IN
THE CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN PARTS
OF THE STATE IN THE PAST 24
HOURS, CAUSING MAJOR FLOODING.
FLASH FLOOD WARNINGS REMAIN IN
EFFECT IN DALLAS, HOUSTON, SAN
ANTONIO AND AUSTIN.
50 MILES SOUTH OF DALLAS, IN THE
TOWN OF CORSICANA, AN
OVERFLOWING CREEK WASHED AWAY
TRAIN TRACKS AND CAUSED A
FREIGHT TRAIN TO DERAIL.
NO ONE WAS HURT.
TRAFFIC WAS BACKED UP 12 MILES
ON A FLOODED SECTION OF
INTERSTATE 45 OVERNIGHT.
TODAY, AROUND 100 FLIGHTS FROM
DALLAS-FORT WORTH AIRPORT WERE
CANCELLED DUE TO THE WEATHER.
EUROPEAN LEADERS ARE GATHERING
IN BRUSSELS FOR TALKS ON DEALING
WITH THE ONGOING SURGE OF
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES FLOWING
INTO THE CONTINENT, A SURGE THAT
CONTINUES DESPITE FALLING
TEMPERATURES IN MUCH OF EUROPE.
ONE IDEA ON THE TABLE: NO LONGER
TRANSFERRING MIGRANTS FROM ONE
COUNTRY TO ANOTHER WITHOUT PRIOR
AGREEMENTS.
SLOVENIA SAYS IT HAS ADMITTED
13,000 ASYLUM SEEKERS IN THE
PAST DAY AND 58,000 DURING THE
PAST WEEK.
AT ONE CAMP ALONG SLOVENIA'S
BORDER WITH CROATIA, POLICE IN
RIOT GEAR USED PEPPER SPRAY TO
CONTROL CROWDS SEEKING TO BOARD
BUSES FOR AUSTRIA.
THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
FOR MIGRATION ESTIMATES 680,000
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES HAVE
CROSSED INTO EUROPE THIS YEAR
FROM THE MIDDLE EAST, AFRICA
AND ASIA.
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY SAYS ISRAEL AND JORDAN
HAVE AGREED ON STEPS TO CURB A
WAVE OF VIOLENCE BETWEEN
PALESTINIANS AND ISRAELIS.
IN JORDAN'S CAPITAL OF AMMAN
TODAY, KERRY MET SEPARATELY WITH
JORDAN'S KING ABDULLAH, AND
PALESTINIAN LEADER MAHMOUD
ABBAS.
KERRY ANNOUNCED THERE WILL BE
24/7 VIDEO MONITORING AROUND A
SACRED SITE IN JERUSALEM'S OLD
CITY.
IT'S KNOWN TO MUSLIMS AS HARAM
AL SHARIF, AND TO JEWS AS THE
TEMPLE MOUNT.
ISRAEL ALSO SAID IT WOULD RE-
AFFIRM JORDAN'S ROLE AS
CUSTODIAN OF THE SITE.
KERRY SAID IT WAS A "FALSE
PERCEPTION" AMONG PALESTINIANS
THAT ISRAEL WANTED TO CHANGE THE
RULES GOVERNING ACCESS TO THE
SITE, A CHARGE ISRAEL HAS
DENIED.
THE CONFLICT OVER THIS SITE HAS
BEEN THE SOURCE OF MUCH OF THE
VIOLENCE IN RECENT WEEKS.
AND TODAY, THOUGH, THAT VIOLENCE
CONTINUED.
ISRAELI SOLDIERS SHOT AND KILLED
A PALESTINIAN TEENAGER WHO TRIED
TO STAB A GUARD AT A WEST BANK
BORDER CROSSING.
IN THE PAST FIVE WEEKS,
PALESTINIANS HAVE KILLED TEN
ISRAELIS, MOSTLY BY STABBINGS,
WHILE THE ISRAELI MILITARY AND
POLICE HAVE KILLED MORE THAN 50
PALESTINIANS, DESCRIBING HALF OF
THEM AS ASSAILANTS WHO HAD
ATTACKED ISRAELI CITIZENS.
FOR MORE ON THIS, I AM JOINED BY
ARSHAD MOHAMMED.
HE'S A CORRESPONDENT FOR
REUTERS, AND HE'S BEEN
TRAVELING WITH SECRETARY KERRY.
HE JOINS ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA.
ARSHAD MOHAMMED, THANKS FOR
BEING HERE.
GIVE ME A LITTLE SENSE OF WHAT
IS IT EXACTLY THAT ISRAEL AND
JORDAN ARE AGREED TO TODAY?
>> WELL, ACCORDING TO SECRETARY
KERRY, THERE ARE BASICALLY FOUR
BROAD STEPS THAT HE SKETCHED
OUT.
THE FIRST IS THAT THERE WOULD BE
24/7 VIDEO SURVEILLANCE OF THE
ENTIRE AREA.
THE IDEA THERE IS THAT
TRANSPARENCY WILL LET EVERYBODY
SEE WHAT'S HAPPENING AND MAKE IT
HARDER TO MISREPRESENT WHAT'S
HAPPENING AND WHETHER THE STATUS
QUO IS CHANGING.
AMONG THE OTHER THINGS ARE THAT
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER NETANYAHU
WILL ENFORCE THE EXISTING
PROHIBITION ON NON-MUSLIMS,
JEWS, CHRISTIANS AND OTHERS
FROM PRAYING ON THE SITE.
THIRD, THAT HE WOULD RESTATE
THAT ISRAEL HAS NO INTENT OF
DIVIDING THE SITE.
AND FOURTH, THAT ISRAEL AND THE
JORDANIAN RELIGIOUS TRUST, THAT
ADMINISTERS THE SITE, WOULD
SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THEIR
COOPERATION, ALL AS A WAY OF
TRYING TO REDUCE TENSIONS AND
PREVENT VIOLENCE.
>> Brangham: GIVEN THAT THERE
HAS BEEN SO MUCH ANIMOSITY OVER
THIS PARTICULAR SITE AND MORE
BROADLY BETWEEN THE ISRAELIS AND
THE PALESTINIANS, HOW LIKELY DO
YOU THINK THAT THIS KIND OF AN
AGREEMENT IS GOING TO HAVE ANY
LASTING EFFECT?
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S HARD TO SAY.
I THINK A LOT OF IT DEPENDS BOTH
ON THE ACTIONS OF OFFICIALS AND
THEN PUBLIC SENTIMENT.
IF THERE IS SEEN TO BE GOOD WILL
ON THE SIDE OF THE ISRAELIS AND
THE SIDE OF JORDANIANS AND THE
PALESTINIAN RESIDENTS OF THE
AREA, YOU KNOW, THEN IT'S
POSSIBLE THAT THE VIOLENCE WILL
COME DOWN.
YOU KNOW, THE OTHER QUESTION IS
WHETHER WHAT OTHER FACTORS THAT
HAVE GIVEN RISE TO THE TENSION
AND THE VIOLENCE AND, YOU KNOW,
ONE FACTOR THAT IS OFTEN CITED
BY PALESTINIANS IS THE FEELING
THAT ISRAEL IS ALLOWING MORE
JEWS TO VISIT THE SITE AND IS
SORT OF TACITLY ACCEPTING THAT
THEY PRAY THERE.
WHETHER THE PALESTINIANS FEEL
LIKE THAT'S ACTUALLY STOPPING OR
ABATING OR BEING REVERSED.
YOU KNOW, I'M NOT IN THE
PREDICTIONS BUSINESS BUT IT DOES
SEEM TO ME THAT BOTH SIDES HAVE
SOME MEASURE OF INTEREST IN
REDUCING THE VIOLENCE IF THEY
CAN.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, ARSHAD
MOHAMMED FROM REUTERS, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH FOR BEING HERE.
>> THANKS FOR YOUR TIME.
>> Brangham: SIGNALING A SHIFT
IN ITS POSITION IN SYRIA, RUSSIA
SAYS IT'S READY TO SUPPORT THE
U.S.-BACKED REBELS WHO ARE
FIGHTING SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR
AL-ASSAD.
RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER SERGEI
LAVROV SAID IN AN INTERVIEW
BROADCAST TODAY THAT RUSSIAN
WARPLANES WOULD SUPPORT THE FREE
SYRIAN ARMY AGAINST ASSAD.
IN AIRSTRIKES THIS MONTH, RUSSIA
BOMBED THOSE SAME SYRIAN REBELS.
LAVROV ALSO SAID RUSSIA IS READY
TO COOPERATE WITH THE U.S. ON
ATTACKING THE ISLAMIC STATE, OR
ISIS, IN SYRIA.
THE U.S. SENATE HAS SCHEDULED
FINAL VOTES NEXT WEEK ON A
BILL THAT WOULD PERMIT COMPANIES
TO SHARE INFORMATION ABOUT
HACKING ATTACKS WITH EACH OTHER
AND WITH THE GOVERNMENT, WITHOUT
FEAR OF LAWSUITS.
THE SO-CALLED "CYBER-SECURITY
INFORMATION SHARING ACT," OR
CISA, HAS ALREADY PASSED THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
BUT SEVERAL BIG TECH COMPANIES
LIKE APPLE AND TWITTER SAY IT
DOES TOO LITTLE TO PROTECT
INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
BILL IS "POLITICO" REPORTER TIM
STARKS.
HELP ME UNDERSTAND THIS.
WE LIKE TO THINK OF LEGISLATION
AS TRYING IT SOLVE A PARTICULAR
PROBLEM.
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM THAT
CISA IS TRYING TO SOLVE?
>> THE PROBLEM HERE IS THAT
THERE IS SOME INFORMATION THAT'S
SHARED NOW ON CYBER SECURITY
THREATS BUT NOT ENOUGH.
THE IDEA OF THIS BILL WOULD BE
TO MAKE IT SO THAT COMPANIES
COULD SEND MORE THREAT
INFORMATION TO THE GOVERNMENT
WITHOUT FEAR OF LAWSUITS.
IT HELPS THEM SOLVE THE PROBLEM
OF WHERE THAT THREAT CAME FROM,
AND, THEREFORE, THAT-- THE IDEA
IS THAT THE GOVERNMENT HAS
DIFFERENT KIND OF EXPERTISE THAN
THE PRIVATE SECTOR, AND THE
GOVERNMENT MIGHT BE ABLE TO HELP
THEM BETTER THAN THEY ARE ABLE
TO HELP THEMSELVES.
>> Brangham: SO IS THE IDEA
THAT A COMPANY EITHER GETS
HACKED OR THINKS THEY'RE BEING
PROBED BY HACKERS, AND THEY WANT
TO THEN SHARE THAT WITH FELLOW
COMPANIES OR THE GOVERNMENT BUT
THEY DON'T WANT TO GET SUED FOR
THAT.
HOW BIG OF A PROBLEM IS THAT?
ARE COMPANIES BEING SUED LEFT
AND RIGHT FOR SHARING THIS KIND
OF INFORMATION TODAY?
>> NO, THEY'RE NOT, BUT THEY
MIGHT BE, DEPENDING ON THE KIND
OF INFORMATION THEY WOULD SHARE
UNDER THIS BILL.
CERTAINLY THE ISSUE OF
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS IS A
DIFFERENT KIND OF THING.
THAT'S RELATED TO TRADE
PRACTICES, FOR INSTANCE.
>> Brangham: SO SEVERAL TECH
COMPANIES, APPLE AMONGST THEM,
HAVE RAISED REAL CONCERNS ABOUT
THIS, SAYING THAT THERE'S HUGE
PRIVACY CONCERNS.
YOU CAN EXPLAIN A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHAT IT IS THAT THEY DON'T
LIKE ABOUT THIS.
>> THERE ARE A NUMBER OF THESE
BIG TECH COMPANIES THAT DO NOT
LIKE THE BILL.
THAT'S BECAUSE THEY'RE WORRIED
ABOUT THE PRIVACY IMPLICATIONS
OF IT.
IF YOU THINK ABOUT THE KIND OF
INFORMATION THAT MIGHT BE SHARED
THAT A COMPANY MIGHT HAVE ON A
THREAT THAT THEY'VE RECEIVED OR
THAT THEY'RE AWARE OF, THERE
MIGHT BE SOME ELEMENTS OF THAT,
THAT INCLUDE WHAT IS CALLED
PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION.
THEY DON'T LIKE THE IDEA OF HOW
MUCH OF THAT MIGHT GET SHARED
UNDER THIS BILL.
I THINK THEY COME AT IT FROM TWO
PERSPECTIVES.
ONE, SILICON VALLEY IS
PHILOSOPHICALLY INCLINED TOWARD
PRIVACY.
AND THEY ARE STILL REELING A
LITTLE BIT FROM WHAT HAPPENED
AFTER EDWARD SNOWDEN'S
REVELATIONS ABOUT THE EXTENT OF
SOME OF THE TECH COMPANIES'
COOPERATION WITH THE NSA.
>> Brangham: SO WHAT IS THE
CONCERN PEOPLE HAVE RAISED?
THEY HAVE SAID IF YOU'RE GETTING
HACKED AND YOU SHARE INFORMATION
WITH THE GOVERNMENT, SOMEHOW
YOU'RE GOING TO REVEAL SOMETHING
ABOUT MY HEALTH INFORMATION, MY
BANKING INFORMATION.
IS THAT THE NATURE OF-- THAT'S
THE CONCERN HERE?
>> YES, THAT'S THE PRIVACY
GROUPS, THEY SAY IT'S A VERY
DANGEROUS BILL, AND INDUSTRY
GROUPS SAY, NO, IF YOU LOOK AT
WHAT THE CYBER THREAT INDICATORS
ARE, THEY'RE SAVED GUARDS ABOUT
MAKING SURE PERSONALLY
IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION IS
SCRUBBED AT SOME POINT AND THAT
THE BULK OF THIS INFORMATION
WILL BE INFORMATION THAT IS JUST
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, ACTUAL LINES OF
CODE IN SOME CASES.
BUT IF YOU LOOK AT THE-- THE
PRIVACY GROUPS SAY CYBER THREAT
INDICATORS ARE POORLY DEFINED IN
THE BILL, NOT NARROWLY DEFINED
ENOUGH.
YOU THINK OF WHAT AN
I.P. ADDRESS MIGHT REVEAL ABOUT
YOU.
IT MIGHT REVEAL YOUR SEXUALITY
AND CERTAIN OTHER KIND OF
INDICATORS THAT WOULD BE
INCLUDED WITH GENDER OR OTHER
SORTS OF INFORMATION THAT IS OF
A PERSONAL NATURE.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, TIM
STARKS OF POLITICO, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Brangham: IN THE PAST YEAR,
THE UNITED STATES DEPORTED OVER
110,000 MIGRANTS FROM CENTRAL
AMERICA, MANY OF WHOM CAME TO
THE U.S. AFTER FLEEING VIOLENCE
IN THREE COUNTRIES: EL SALVADOR,
GUATEMALA AND HONDURAS.
AS THE DRUG GANG VIOLENCE IN
THAT NORTHERN TRIANGLE OF
CENTRAL AMERICA CONTINUES, IT'S
BEEN ACCOMPANIED BY A SURGE IN
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
IN FACT, HONDURAS, A NATION OF
EIGHT MILLION PEOPLE, HAS ONE OF
THE HIGHEST MURDER RATES OF
WOMEN IN THE WORLD.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE BRING YOU THE STORY OF A 19-
YEAR-OLD WOMAN NAMED LILIAN.
TO PROTECT HER IDENTITY, WE'RE
ONLY USING HER FIRST NAME.
LILIAN TRIED TO ESCAPE THE
VIOLENCE, BUT AS YOU'LL SEE, HER
JOURNEY HIGHLIGHTS THE QUESTION:
IS DOMESTIC VIOLENCE A
LEGITIMATE, LEGAL REASON TO BE
PERMITTED TO STAY IN THE U.S.?
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOHN
CARLOS FREY HAS OUR STORY.
AND A WARNING: THIS STORY
INCLUDES SOME GRAPHIC IMAGES.
>> Reporter: IN THIS HILLSIDE
SLUM IN HONDURAS, 19-YEAR-OLD
LILIAN IS HIDING FROM HER
EX-BOYFRIEND.
SHE SAYS HE BEAT HER AND RAPED
HER FOR YEARS.
>> (translated): HE WOULD GO
OUT WITH HIS LOVERS TO DRINK
AWAY HIS MONEY, HAVE FUN, AND I
WOULD COMPLAIN.
HE WOULD PUNISH ME, HIT ME WITH
A BELT OR WHATEVER HE COULD.
>> Reporter: THEIR RELATIONSHIP
BEGAN SIX YEARS AGO, WHEN THEY
MET IN HER RURAL VILLAGE IN
EASTERN HONDURAS.
HE WAS 22.
SHE WAS ONLY 13.
DAYS BEFORE HER 15th BIRTHDAY,
SHE GAVE BIRTH TO THEIR SON, WHO
IS NOW FOUR AND LIVES WITH HER.
WHEN LILIAN MET HER BOYFRIEND,
SHE HAD QUIT SCHOOL AFTER THIRD
GRADE AND COULD BARELY READ AND
WRITE.
HE PROMISED OPPORTUNITIES SHE
HAD NEVER IMAGINED.
>> (translated): HE OFFERED ME
BETTER THINGS.
HE OFFERED TO LET ME STUDY,
THAT HE'D TAKE ME TO THE CITY
AND OTHER THINGS.
>> Reporter: INSTEAD, SHE SAYS,
HE ORDERED HER TO WORK IN THE
FIELDS, CUTTING LUMBER AND
COOKING.
THERE WAS NO SCHOOL, NO TRIPS TO
THE CITY.
LILIAN SAYS THE BEATINGS
WORSENED AFTER SHE GAVE BIRTH.
WHEN SHE REFUSED TO HAVE SEX
WITH HER BOYFRIEND, SHE SAYS, HE
FORCED HER.
>> (translated): IT WAS PURE
HELL DAY AND NIGHT, FIGHTING
WITH ME.
WHEN THE BABY WAS BORN, HE WOULD
ARGUE BECAUSE OF THE BABY.
FIGHTING ABOUT THE BABY, THAT IT
WAS HIS, AND THAT IF I LEFT AND
TOOK HIM WITH ME, HE'D KILL ME.
>> Reporter: SHE WANTED TO RUN
AWAY, BUT HAD NO JOB AND NO
MEANS TO DO SO.
>> (translated): IF I TOLD MY
MOM, SHE WOULD SUPPORT ME.
BUT MY FATHER?
NEVER.
I ALSO NEVER WANTED TO BRING MY
BROTHERS INTO THE PROBLEM
BECAUSE THEY WOULDN'T LIKE IT.
ALSO HE, MY EX-BOYFRIEND, IS A
VERY VIOLENT MAN AND WOULD TELL
ME IF I TOLD ANYONE I WAS
SUFFERING HE WOULD KILL ME.
HE'D SHOW UP WITH A GUN AND
POINT IT AT ME.
WHAT WAS I TO DO?
>> Reporter: "HOW DID HE POINT
IT," I ASKED.
"LIKE THIS?"
>> (translated): LIKE THIS,
TO THE HEAD, AND THREATENED ME
WITH IT.
>> Reporter: A PISTOL, HERE ON
THE HEAD, AND HE RAPED YOU?
>> (translated): YES, AND HE
PUT IT LIKE THIS TO MY HEAD,
LOADED.
>> (translated): EVERY
13 HOURS, A WOMAN IS MURDERED IN
THIS COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: GLADYS LANZA RUNS A
GROUP WORKING TO STEM THE RISING
TIDE OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
IN HONDURAS.
SHE SAYS 96% OF DOMESTIC ABUSE
COMPLAINTS ARE NEVER RESOLVED.
>> (translated): 96%.
THAT IS THE DEGREE OF IMPUNITY
THAT EXISTS IN THIS COUNTRY.
SINCE THERE IS NO PUNISHMENT,
SINCE THERE IS NO INVESTIGATION,
SINCE THE RESPONSIBLE ASSAILANTS
ARE NEVER FOUND, THEN THERE'S
THIS PERMANENT SITUATION OF
CRIME AND VIOLENCE IN THE
COUNTRY.
IT'S A PERMANENT STATE.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST DECADE,
THE NUMBER OF VIOLENT DEATHS OF
WOMEN IN HONDURAS HAS RISEN
260%, FROM 175 IN 2005 TO 636 IN
2013, ACCORDING TO THE MOST
RECENT DATA.
>> (translated): WE FEEL
IMPOTENCE.
WE FEEL FRUSTRATION.
>> Reporter: MARIA MERCEDES
BUSTILLOS IS THE COUNTRY'S CHIEF
SPECIAL PROSECUTOR FOR THE
PROTECTION OF WOMEN, APPOINTED
BY THE HONDURAN PRESIDENT.
HER OFFICE RECEIVES 20,000
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE COMPLAINTS
EVERY YEAR, BUT ONLY A FRACTION
ARE PROSECUTED BECAUSE SO MANY
WOMEN FEAR TESTIFYING.
LILIAN HAS NO OFFICIAL
DOCUMENTATION OF HER ABUSE, NO
MEDICAL OR POLICE RECORDS.
MERCEDES SAYS THAT'S THE CASE
FOR MANY VICTIMS IN HONDURAS.
>> (translated): THE
VICTIMS SUDDENLY RETRACT
THEIR CASES BECAUSE OF THE CYCLE
OF VIOLENCE.
AND THAT'S WHERE THE WEAKNESS OF
THE SYSTEM LIES, OF NOT BEING
ABLE TO REACH THEM ONCE THE
COMPLAINT HAS BEEN MADE.
>> Reporter: MERCEDES SAYS EVEN
WHEN WOMEN SEEK HELP, THERE
AREN'T SUFFICIENT GOVERNMENT
SERVICES TO ASSIST THEM.
>> (translated): A VICTIM
NEEDS A SHELTER TO GO TO WITH
HER CHILDREN-- A PLACE TO EAT,
TO BATHE, TO SLEEP BEFORE THE
LEGAL PROCESS CONTINUES.
THE GOVERNMENT DOESN'T HAVE ANY
SHELTERS.
>> Reporter: LILIAN SAYS HER
BOYFRIEND BECAME INCREASINGLY
DANGEROUS AFTER HE GOT INVOLVED
WITH A MEXICAN DRUG CARTEL
CALLED "LOS ZETAS."
AFTER THE BABY WAS A YEAR OLD,
LILIAN MANAGED TO ESCAPE FOR
MONTHS AT A TIME AND SUPPORT
HERSELF, BUT EACH TIME HER
BOYFRIEND TRACKED HER DOWN.
LILIAN FELT SHE HAD NOWHERE TO
TURN FOR PROTECTION.
>> (translated): HE'D THREATEN
ME IF I SPOKE TO THE POLICE OR
MADE CHARGES AGAINST HIM.
HE THREATENED TO SET FIRE TO THE
HOUSE.
SINCE I WAS A LITTLE GIRL, I WAS
REALLY AFRAID.
I WAS AFRAID OF HIM FOR A LONG
TIME.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, AN UNCLE
IN TEXAS OFFERED TO PAY
SMUGGLERS $4,000 TO HELP LILIAN
FLEE TO THE UNITED STATES
WITHOUT A VISA, A RISKY TRIP
THAT THOUSANDS OF OTHER WOMEN
OPTED TO UNDERTAKE AS WELL.
HER UNCLE HAD ONLY ENOUGH MONEY
FOR LILIAN, SO SHE LEFT HER SON
BEHIND WITH A RELATIVE, HOPING
TO SEND FOR HIM ONCE SHE
ARRIVED.
JUST 18 AND ALONE, LILIAN MET
SMUGGLERS IN GUATEMALA AND BEGAN
THE WEEK-LONG TREK THROUGH
MEXICO.
>> (translated): SOMETIMES
IT'S 24 HOURS IN A BUS OR
WALKING.
THERE ARE TIMES THAT YOU'RE
LOCKED UP ALONE IN A PLACE
WITHOUT FOOD.
>> Reporter: LAST MAY, LILIAN
ARRIVED NEAR McALLEN, TEXAS,
WHERE U.S. BORDER GUARDS
QUESTIONED AND DETAINED HER.
"DID YOU TELL THEM YOUR
HISTORY," I ASKED, "THAT YOU HAD
A BOYFRIEND WHO WAS GOING TO
KILL YOU?"
>> (translated): I DIDN'T TELL
THEM BECAUSE I THOUGHT THAT THE
GOVERNMENT HERE OR THAT HE WOULD
FIND OUT.
I EXPLAINED ABOUT THE BABY.
THE MOST TERRIBLE THINGS I
DIDN'T EXPLAIN THERE.
>> Reporter: UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA-HASTINGS
LAW PROFESSOR KAREN MUSALO
REPRESENTS WOMEN SEEKING ASYLUM,
A LEGAL MECHANISM THAT ALLOWS
PEOPLE FLEEING PERSECUTION, OR
FEAR OF PERSECUTION, TO LIVE AND
WORK IN THE UNITED STATES.
>> FROM MY OWN EXPERIENCE
WORKING WITH CENTRAL AMERICANS
AND KNOWING WHAT THEY KNOW AND
DON'T KNOW AND WHAT THEIR
PERCEPTION OF THE PROCESS IS, I
WOULD DOUBT THEY HAVE A
SOPHISTICATED OR CLEAR OR EVEN
CORRECT UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN THEY ARRIVE IN THE
U.S.
>> Reporter: MUSALO SAYS
ASYLUM SEEKERS ARE SCREENED TO
SEE IF THEY HAVE A "CREDIBLE
FEAR" OF RETURNING HOME.
>> IF THEY DON'T INDICATE RIGHT
THERE AT THAT INITIAL INTERVIEW
THAT THEY LEFT BECAUSE OF SOME
KIND OF FEAR, THEY COULD BE
IMMEDIATELY RETURNED.
>> Reporter: LILIAN'S INITIAL
RELUCTANCE TO TELL HER WHOLE
STORY, TO PROVE A "CREDIBLE
FEAR," LED IMMIGRATION
OFFICIALS TO SEND HER BACK TO
HONDURAS.
>> (translated): I WAS
DEPORTED AND HAD TO GO HOME WITH
NO MONEY, WITH NOTHING.
>> Reporter: STEPHEN LEGOMSKY, A
FORMER ATTORNEY FOR THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT'S CITIZENSHIP AND
IMMIGRATION SERVICE, SAYS THE
FEAR OF VIOLENCE IS NOT ALWAYS
ENOUGH FOR SOMEONE TO QUALIFY
FOR ASYLUM.
>> IF, FOR EXAMPLE, YOU WERE IN
DANGER OF BEING KILLED BECAUSE
SOMEONE HAD A PERSONAL GRUDGE
AGAINST YOU, OR EVEN BECAUSE A
YOUTH GANG IS ANGRY AT YOU FOR
REFUSING TO JOIN THEIR RANKS,
THE PRESENT CASE LAW IS THAT YOU
GENERALLY WOULD NOT QUALIFY FOR
ASYLUM.
>> Reporter: ASYLUM APPLICANTS
MUST ALSO THEN PROVE PERSECUTION
BASED ON RACE, RELIGION,
NATIONALITY, POLITICAL OPINION
OR MEMBERSHIP IN A PARTICULAR
SOCIAL GROUP.
WOMEN WHO FACE VIOLENCE MAY OR
MAY NOT BE RECOGNIZED AS A
SOCIAL GROUP, DEPENDING ON EACH
INDIVIDUAL CASE.
BACK IN HONDURAS, LILIAN SAYS
HER BOYFRIEND CONTACTED HER AT
LEAST THREE TIMES AFTER HER
RETURN, THREATENING TO TAKE HER
SON AWAY.
LAST FALL, JUST FOUR MONTHS
AFTER BEING DEPORTED, LILIAN
TRIED TO ESCAPE AGAIN, THIS
TIME WITH HER SON.
"WITH THE CHILD, YOU THOUGHT YOU
HAD A BETTER CHANCE," I ASKED.
>> (translated): YES, WITH THE
HOPE NOT TO BE DETAINED, I
THOUGHT.
>> Reporter: IN OCTOBER 2014, A
FAMILY FRIEND PAID SMUGGLERS
$6000 TO HELP LILIAN AND HER SON
AGAIN MAKE THE WEEKLONG JOURNEY.
THEY CROSSED THE BORDER NEAR
HIDALGO, TEXAS, AND PRESENTED
THEMSELVES TO IMMIGRATION
OFFICIALS.
THIS TIME, LILIAN TOLD HER FULL
STORY AND LATER PRESENTED
SWORN AFFIDAVITS FROM TWO
WITNESSES SAYING SHE AND HER SON
WERE IN DANGER.
ONE WROTE THAT LILIAN "WAS
MISTREATED BY HER FORMER
PARTNER, AND HE CONTINUES TO
LOOK FOR HER AND CLAIMS TO KILL
HER WHEN HE FINDS HER."
ANOTHER PERSON IN HONDURAS WROTE
OF LILIAN AND HER SON: "THEIR
LIVES ARE IN DANGER IN THIS
COUNTRY."
LIKE THOUSANDS OF OTHER MIGRANTS
FROM HONDURAS, AS WELL AS
GUATEMALA AND EL SALVADOR, LAST
YEAR, LILIAN AND HER SON WAITED
IN A FAMILY DETENTION CENTER IN
TEXAS.
>> THE IMMIGRATION JUDGES AND
THE BOARD OF IMMIGRATION APPEALS
WHO DECIDE MOST OF THESE CASES
ARE NOTORIOUSLY UNDERSTAFFED.
THEY, FOR YEARS AND YEARS, HAVE
ASKED CONGRESS FOR MORE
RESOURCES SO THEY CAN DECIDE
CASES BOTH FULLY AND
EXPEDITIOUSLY.
AND THUS FAR, CONGRESS HAS NOT
BEEN WILLING TO PROVIDE THOSE
RESOURCES.
SO THERE'S A LONG, LONG BACKLOG.
>> Reporter: THIS JUNE, HOMELAND
SECURITY SECRETARY JEH JOHNSON
ANNOUNCED A PLAN TO REDUCE THE
BACKLOG OF CASES AND TO WIND
DOWN FAMILY DETENTION, SAYING
"LONG-TERM DETENTION IS AN
INEFFICIENT USE OF OUR RESOURCES
AND SHOULD BE DISCONTINUED."
AFTER EIGHT MONTHS IN DETENTION,
LILIAN LEARNED HER ASYLUM
REQUEST WAS AGAIN DENIED.
SHE ALSO SAYS HER BOYFRIEND,
WHO'D BEEN WORKING WITH THE
ZETAS DRUG GANG IN MEXICO, WAS
SENT BACK TO HONDURAS.
>> (translated): THEN WHEN I
SPOKE TO MY MOM, SHE TOLD ME THE
BABY'S FATHER HAD BEEN CAUGHT BY
MEXICAN IMMIGRATION, AND HE WAS
BACK IN MY COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: IN JUNE,
IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS PUT LILIAN
AND HER SON ON A PLANE BACK TO
HONDURAS.
LILIAN NOW HAS A LAWYER IN THE
U.S. WORKING ON AN APPEAL, AND A
NEW LEGAL PRECEDENT MAY OFFER
HER A PATHWAY TO ASYLUM.
IN AUGUST 2014, THE HIGHEST
IMMIGRATION COURT IN THE U.S.,
THE BOARD OF IMMIGRATION
APPEALS, GRANTED ASYLUM TO A
DOMESTIC ABUSE SURVIVOR FROM
GUATEMALA, SAYING SHE WAS PART
OF A PARTICULAR SOCIAL GROUP
UNDER U.S. ASYLUM LAW.
THOUGH THERE'S NO OFFICIAL
COUNT, ADVOCATES SAY ANECDOTALLY
A HANDFUL OF CASES HAVE BEEN WON
USING THAT PRECEDENT, BUT FORMER
IMMIGRATION OFFICIAL STEPHEN
LEGOMSKY SAYS THE BAR IS STILL
HIGH.
>> EVEN WITH THIS BOARD OF
IMMIGRATION APPEALS DECISION,
AND EVEN ASSUMING THE WOMAN IS
ABLE TO GET HERE IN THE FIRST
PLACE, SHE STILL FACES A NUMBER
OF TOUGH HURDLES.
>> Reporter: AND OF COURSE AN
IMMIGRATION JUDGE HAS TO BELIEVE
LILIAN'S STORY.
>> (translated): I WENT TO
THEM WITH MY CASE THAT IS
CREDIBLE BEFORE GOD, ABOVE ALL
THINGS, AND I SWEAR THAT
EVERYTHING I TOLD YOU AND
EVERYTHING I TOLD THEM IS TRUE.
IT IS THE TRUTH AND NOTHING BUT
THE TRUTH.
>> Brangham: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND TOMORROW, CORRESPONDENT
JOHN CARLOS FREY SITS DOWN WITH
THE PRESIDENT OF HONDURAS, JUAN
ORLANDO HERNANDEZ, TO DISCUSS
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN HIS
COUNTRY.
>> I ASKED THE PRESIDENT ABOUT
THOSE CORRUPTION ALLEGATIONS,
PARTICULARLY THAT MONEY MEANT TO
HELP BATTERED WOMEN ISN'T
REACHING VICTIMS.
>> (translated): OUR
ADMINISTRATION DECIDED TO LAUNCH
A CAMPAIGN EVEN BEFORE TAKING
OFFICE-- NOT JUST TO PATCH UP
LAWS PASSED BY PREVIOUS
CONGRESSES, BUT ALSO TO
IMPLEMENT PROGRAMS THAT WILL
PROVIDE TRANSPARENCY AND PUT UP
A FULL FRONTAL ASSAULT AGAINST
CORRUPTION.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Brangham: THE UNITED STATES
AND CHINA HAVE RECENTLY
COMMITTED TO NEARLY TOTAL BANS
ON THE IVORY TRADE.
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND CHINESE
PRESIDENT XI AGREED TO THE GOAL
LAST MONTH, WHICH HOPES TO CURB
THE POACHING OF ELEPHANTS WHO
ARE KILLED FOR THEIR IVORY
TUSKS.
BUT CHINA REMAINS THE WORLD'S
BIGGEST CONSUMER OF IVORY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: HONG KONG IS ONE OF
THE LARGEST IVORY SMUGGLING HUBS
IN THE WORLD.
DESPITE A 25-YEAR-OLD
INTERNATIONAL BAN ON THE IMPORT
AND EXPORT OF ELEPHANT TUSKS,
POACHERS KILL AN ESTIMATED
33,000 AFRICAN ELEPHANTS EVERY
YEAR.
THEY FIND A READY MARKET IN AN
INCREASINGLY AFFLUENT CHINA,
ESPECIALLY FOR JEWELRY AND
STATUES MADE OF IVORY.
NOW, THE CONSERVATION GROUP
WILDAID, ALONG WITH THE WORLD
WILDLIFE FUND, IS CALLING NEW
ATTENTION TO THE PROBLEM.
>> BASICALLY, THE TRADERS THAT
WE'VE INTERVIEWED IN UNDERCOVER
INTERVIEWS-- NOT JUST US, BUT
OTHER MEDIA, AS WELL-- WHAT
THEY'RE SAYING IS THAT "WE CAN
BRING IN NEW IVORY, NO PROBLEM,
WE CAN GET PAPERWORK FOR IT."
IT'S BASICALLY HONG KONG IS AN
IVORY LAUNDRY WHERE ILLEGAL
IVORY CAN COME IN, AND THEN ONCE
IT'S HERE, THE PEOPLE WITH THE
PERMITS HAVE LEGAL RIGHT TO SELL
IT.
>> Reporter: IN THIS UNDERCOVER
VIDEO OBTAINED BY WILDAID AND
THE WORLD WILDLIFE FUND, YOU CAN
SEE A SHOPKEEPER EXPLAIN HOW LAX
CHINESE REGULATIONS MAKE IT EASY
TO IMPORT IVORY INTO CHINA.
>> Reporter: IN HONG KONG,
LICENSED VENDORS ARE ALLOWED TO
SELL IVORY THEY OBTAINED BEFORE
THE 1989 BAN, BUT THE SUPPLY OF
IVORY ITEMS HAS NOT DIMINISHED
AS EXPECTED, RAISING QUESTIONS
ABOUT WHETHER VENDORS ARE
TOPPING UP THEIR SUPPLIES WITH
NEW, ILLEGAL IVORY.
WILD AID AND THE WORLD WILDLIFE
FUND ESTIMATE THERE ARE
CURRENTLY 111 TONS OF IVORY FOR
SALE IN HONG KONG SHOPS.
AND WHILE THE U.S. AND CHINA
HAVE PLEDGED TO INCREASE EFFORTS
TO END THE IVORY TRADE, THE
CONSERVATION GROUPS ARE
ADVOCATING FOR AN OUTRIGHT BAN
OF ALL IVORY SALES IN HONG KONG.
>> Brangham: AND FINALLY
TONIGHT, SOME RARE AND EMOTIONAL
REUNIONS FOR FAMILIES FROM NORTH
AND SOUTH KOREA.
UNDER A SPECIAL ARRANGEMENT
BETWEEN THE TWO NATIONS, 440
RELATIVES ARE VISITING EACH
OTHER THIS WEEKEND IN A NORTH
KOREAN VILLAGE.
SPOUSES AND SIBLINGS, PARENTS
AND CHILDREN, MANY IN THEIR 80s
AND 90s, KEPT APART FOR SIX
DECADES.
SOUTH KOREA CHOSE PARTICIPANTS
BY LOTTERY WHILE NORTH KOREA
AWARDED THOSE WHO SHOWED LOYALTY
TO THE STATE.
NORTH AND SOUTH KOREA
TECHNICALLY REMAIN IN A STATE OF
WAR WITH NO TREATY AND NO FREE
TRAVEL ACROSS THEIR BORDER.
ON TOMORROW'S PROGRAM, A LOOK AT
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S NEW
CALL TO ROLL BACK STANDARDIZED
TESTING IN SCHOOLS.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.